_upgrading/sopel-7.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Sopel 7.0 Migration
---

# Sopel 7.0 Migration

Sopel 7 lays the groundwork for a lot of awesome stuff! We have a major update
to Sopel's command-line interface in progress (which will be finished in Sopel
8), and some API updates that might affect a few existing modules.

But first, we really need to talk briefly about Python.


## A note about Python versions

If you still use Sopel under Python 2, you might notice that Sopel 7 emits
warnings about version compatibility. The sad reality is, as of January 1, 2020,
Python 2.7 no longer receives any updates. While this doesn't mean we will
simply drop support for running Sopel under Python 2 immediately, it _does_ mean
that we will no longer reject ideas that would require doing so.

For the life of Sopel 7.x, we still plan to maintain compatibility with Python
2.7 unless it becomes absolutely necessary to drop it. For example, if a severe
bug is found in one of Sopel's dependencies, and the fix is only released for
Python 3, we would consider dropping Python 2 support in the next minor version.

From Sopel 8 onward, it would be much easier to implement new features and
enhancements if we dropped support for very old Python releases. For example,
Sopel's support for reloading modules during runtime can be made much more
robust using features added to the language in Python 3.4.

The crux of the matter is this: Sopel's range of supported Python releases
remained stagnant for far too long. While the Sopel project was effectively
unmaintained between late 2016 and early 2018, Python 3.3 reached end-of-life
(September 29, 2017). During the lengthy development period of Sopel 7, Python
3.4 reached end-of-life (March 18, 2019). Sopel 7 is likely to be released very
close to the EOL of Python 2.7.

We can't keep testing support for these old versions forever. At some point,
Sopel's core developers will lose the ability to run them locally. (Python 3.3
is already difficult—though not impossible—to install on current popular Linux
systems like Ubuntu 18.04 LTS.) Travis CI, our continuous integration testing
provider for contributions from both maintainers and the community alike, won't
keep supporting the installation of EOL Python releases indefinitely. We can't
support what we can't test.

Keeping all this in mind, the current plan is as follows. Note that it is
subject to change, as Sopel's development pace remains quite leisurely relative
to the overall Python ecosystem.

  - Sopel 7 will try to maintain the same Python version compatibility range as
    Sopel 6
    - This may change as Sopel 7 gets closer to release, depending on how our
      testing infrastructure and dependencies look, but we're motivated to keep
      things as-is (one of Sopel's maintainers still runs a production instance
      on Python 2.7, and cannot upgrade that system to a compatible version of
      Python 3 without significant work)
  - Sopel 8 will drop support for Python releases that are EOL as of the start
    of its development cycle
    - This **definitely** means 2.7, 3.3, and 3.4 (already EOL)
    - Python 3.5 and 3.6 support **might** be dropped, depending on timing
      - Python 3.6 is [tentatively][PEP-494] EOL in December 2021, so presumably
        support for 3.5 will end before then, but we don't have enough concrete
        information from the Python project to _really_ plan this far in advance

[PEP-494]: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0494/


## Database support

Sopel 7 brings back support for databases other than SQLite—an often-requested
feature ever since Sopel went SQLite-only in version 5.

While we can't practically offer documentation on every possible setup, it
should be fairly easy to migrate an existing installation to any supported
database type with a bit of search-fu. Sopel's database support is built on
SQLAlchemy, which has [ample documentation][sqlalchemy-dialects] of its own
about getting up and running with various back-ends.

Please don't hesitate to offer feedback in [our IRC channel][sopel-freenode] or
[a GitHub issue][gh-new-issue]. This is a huge feature, and with a small team
it's simply not possible for us to test everything—especially the less common
database types (paid ones like Oracle, especially).

[gh-new-issue]: https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/issues/new
[sopel-freenode]: irc://chat.freenode.net/sopel
[sqlalchemy-dialects]: https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/13/dialects/index.html


## CLI restructuring

Version 7 deprecates most of the command-line arguments that Sopel has used for
most of its life, in favor of a much more extensible command structure.

Instead of having arguments like `--quit` or `--configure-modules`, Sopel's CLI
now works on a sub-command system (like Git and other popular tools). This will
allow adding more functions without having to share one global argument
namespace, and make the commands more "speakable".

The full new command structure will be documented in the [Command-line
arguments]({% link _usage/command-line-arguments.md %}) after release, but as a
general overview of the old structure vs. the new:

|             This            |           Becomes           |
| :-------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `sopel --quit`              | `sopel quit`                |
| `sopel --kill`              | `sopel quit --kill`         |
| `sopel --configure-all`     | `sopel configure`           |
| `sopel --configure-modules` | `sopel configure --modules` |

There's one argument deserving of special mention: `--migrate`/`-m`. It will
be removed in Sopel 7, because it has been a no-op since version 4.0.0.
Someone deleted the code to handle it without mentioning it anywhere, but
Sopel has continued to carry around this useless argument since 2014. No more!

New commands are not always going to be shorter than the old ones (see the
`--kill` example), but we're looking at the future picture. This is just the
start of Sopel's CLI evolution, and more features will come based on this new
command structure.

### Removal of old commands

For the life of Sopel 7, the existing ("legacy") arguments are still supported,
just with deprecation notices in the `--help` output.

In Sopel 8, the old arguments from Sopel 6 and lower will be removed.

Later releases of Sopel 7 may output warnings when deprecated arguments are
used, but you really should update your scripts immediately upon upgrading to
Sopel 7. Then you can't forget later!


## Sopel 7 API changes

### Managing URL callbacks

For quite a while, Sopel modules wishing to override the `url.py` module's
automatic title-fetching for certain URLs have customarily done something along
these lines:

```python
# in the module's setup() function:
    if not bot.memory['url_callbacks']:
        bot.memory['url_callbacks'] = tools.SopelMemory()
    bot.memory['url_callbacks'][compiled_regex] = methodname
```

Similar manual manipulation of the object in memory was needed to unregister
handlers at module unload:

```python
# in the module's shutdown() function:
    try:
        del bot.memory['url_callbacks'][compiled_regex]
    except KeyError:
        pass
```

Going forward, a new set of API methods should be used instead:

  - `bot.register_url_callback(pattern, methodname)`, to call `methodname` when
    a URL in a message matches the `pattern`
  - `bot.unregister_url_callback(pattern)`, to unregister the `pattern` and its
    associated callback(s)
  - `bot.search_url_callbacks(url)`, to find callbacks matching the given `url`

Manually accessing `bot.memory['url_callbacks']` as before will continue to work
for the life of Sopel 7.x, at a minimum. However, doing so is considered
deprecated, leaving future versions free to move the callback storage if needed.

### Adding multiple command examples

Decorating a module callable like this was a great way to add documentation to
that command through Sopel's `help` module:

```python
from sopel import module

@module.example('.foo barbaz')
def foo_cmd(bot, trigger):
    bot.action('foos %s' % trigger.group(3))
```

However, *only one example* could ever appear in the `help` output. This was
[confusing](https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/issues/1200) to module authors.

Furthermore, if more than one example was defined:

```python
from sopel import module

@module.example('.foo barbaz')
@module.example('.foo spam eggs sausage bacon')
def foo_cmd(bot, trigger):
    bot.action('foos %s' % ', '.join(trigger.group(2).split())
```

It was not necessarily intuitive which example would be displayed if a user
did `.help foo`. The code says it would use `example[0]`. That's the first one
in the list, which makes sense. But take a guess which of the two above would
be used—`.foo barbaz` or `.foo spam eggs sausage bacon`?

Ready to see if you were right?

Sopel would use `.foo spam eggs sausage bacon` as the example, because due to
how decorators work, it ends up first in the internal list despite appearing
last in the source code. Not very intuitive for beginning module writers…

So, in Sopel 7, there is a `user_help` argument to `@module.example`. If at
least one of a callable's examples has this attribute set to `True`, all such
examples will be used when outputting help for that command:

```python
from sopel import module

@module.example('.foo barbaz', 'foos barbaz', user_help=True)
@module.example('.foo', "I can't foo that!")
@module.example('.foo egg sausage bacon', 'foos egg, sausage, bacon', user_help=True)
def foo_cmd(bot, trigger):
    if not trigger.group(2):
        return bot.say("I can't foo that!")
    bot.action('foos %s' % ', '.join(trigger.group(2).split())
```

Here, Sopel's help output will show both `.foo barbaz` and `.foo egg sausage
bacon` as examples. Plain `.foo` does not have `user_help=True` (it's purely
there for testing), and so it will not be shown.

Of course, backwards compatibility is important! That's why we used this
approach. Callables without any `user_help=True` examples will behave just
like they would have in Sopel 6 and older: The "first" example (the one
closest to the function's `def` line, last in the source line order) will
appear in `help`'s output.

Making `user_help=True` the default would make *a ton* of sense, definitely!
But if we did that, many (many) existing Sopel (and Willie) modules would
potentially output "bad" help information—so we elected to keep the old
behavior by default in an effort to minimize any "breakage".


## Sopel 7 module changes

### Rewrite of `spellcheck`

As of February 2018, the Python bindings for `enchant` [became unmaintained][
pyenchant-unmaintained]. This made it increasingly difficult to install the
dependencies required for the `spellcheck` module work, and often [caused][
windows-enchant] [problems][linux-enchant] with new installations.

Because of this, the `spellcheck` module was rewritten to use `aspell` instead.
In the process, it also gained support for a custom word list, managed by a set
of new commands:

  - `.scadd` - stages a word for adding to the bot's word list
  - `.scpending` - lists words pending addition to the bot's custom list
  - `.scdel` - removes a word from the pending list
  - `.scsave` - commits pending words to the bot's word list
  - `.scclear` - clears the list of pending words without saving

Unfortunately, the `aspell` API only supports *adding* words to the custom
dictionary. To *remove* a custom word, a user must manually edit the dictionary
file, so we decided to go with a two-step process. Hopefully it will help Sopel
admins around the world avoid adding typos to their bots' custom dictionaries!

Depending on how much trouble the `aspell` dependencies cause, support for the
`spellcheck` module might become a setuptools extra. Feedback is welcome!

  [pyenchant-unmaintained]: https://github.com/rfk/pyenchant/commit/4df35b7
  [windows-enchant]: https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/issues/1142
  [linux-enchant]: https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/pull/1454


## Planned future API changes

### Removal of `bot.privileges`

Sopel 7.x will be the last release series to support the `bot.privileges` data
structure (deprecated in [Sopel 6.2.0][v6.2.0], released January 16, 2016).

Beginning in Sopel 8, `bot.privileges` will be removed and modules trying to
access it will throw an exception. `bot.channels` will be the _only_ place to
get privilege data going forward.

We suggest updating your own modules as soon as possible, if you have not
already done so, to avoid forgetting later (this will be a theme for these
notes). Updating modules published to PyPI should take priority, especially
modules written for Sopel 6 that are not future-proofed by capping Sopel's
version in their requirements.

If you use third-party modules that have not been updated, we encourage you to
inform the author(s) politely that they need to update. Or better yet, submit
a pull request or patch yourself!

### Removal of `bot.msg()`

[Back in 6.0][v6.0.0], Sopel's API standardized around a consistent argument
order for messaging functions: `message` first, then an optional `recipient` (or
`destination`, if you like). Part of the old API, `bot.msg()`, has stuck around
since then because it was, [quote][msg-hard-comment], "way too much of a pain to
remove". In fact, it turned out to be quite easy to remove.

None of Sopel's own code uses this old method any more, and we will remove it
entirely in 8.0. Uses of `bot.msg()` in 7.0 will emit a deprecation warning, so
any remaining third-party code that still uses it can be patched.

If you use third-party modules that have not been updated, we encourage you to
inform the author(s) politely that they need to update. Or better yet, submit
a pull request or patch yourself!

  [msg-hard-comment]: https://git.io/sopel-msg-pain

### Rename/cleanup of `sopel.web`

While the whole `sopel.web` module was marked as deprecated in [Sopel
6.2.0][v6.2.0], because it largely serves as a wrapper around the `requests`
library, parts of it seem to be useful enough that they should be kept around.

For Sopel 8, we intend to move `sopel.web` to `sopel.tools.web`. Ideally the new
location will be available in Sopel 7 to provide a transitional period. Similar
to how importing from both `willie` and `sopel` worked in the run-up to Sopel
6.0, it will be possible to do any of the following during Sopel 7's life cycle:

  - `import sopel.web`
  - `from sopel import web`
  - `import sopel.tools.web`
  - `from sopel.tools import web`

In Sopel 8, we will remove the pointers from `sopel.web` to the new location.
These explicitly deprecated functions will also be removed at the same time:

  - `sopel.web.get()` — use `requests.get()` directly instead
  - `sopel.web.head()` — use `requests.head()` directly instead
  - `sopel.web.post()` — use `requests.post()` directly instead
  - `sopel.web.get_urllib_object()` — seriously, just use [`requests`][requests]

We will also tweak the module constants:

  - `sopel.web.default_headers`: renamed to `sopel.tools.web.DEFAULT_HEADERS`
  - `sopel.web.ca_certs`: removed in `sopel.tools.web` — it no longer has any
    function (and was probably not useful for Sopel plugins to import, anyway)

New additions to Sopel's web tools (there may be a few) will be available only
in the new location (`sopel.tools.web`). Functions and constants that we plan to
remove (as listed above) will be available only from the old `sopel.web` module.

  [requests]: https://pypi.org/project/requests/
  [v6.0.0]: {% link _changelogs/6.0.0.md %}
  [v6.2.0]: {% link _changelogs/6.2.0.md %}

Commit message:

Sopel 7: Avoid increasing boilerplate in planned changes
Just say "update your shit" once. No need to put it in every subsection.

_upgrading/sopel-7.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Sopel 7.0 Migration
---

# Sopel 7.0 Migration

Sopel 7 lays the groundwork for a lot of awesome stuff! We have a major update
to Sopel's command-line interface in progress (which will be finished in Sopel
8), and some API updates that might affect a few existing modules.

But first, we really need to talk briefly about Python.


## A note about Python versions

If you still use Sopel under Python 2, you might notice that Sopel 7 emits
warnings about version compatibility. The sad reality is, as of January 1, 2020,
Python 2.7 no longer receives any updates. While this doesn't mean we will
simply drop support for running Sopel under Python 2 immediately, it _does_ mean
that we will no longer reject ideas that would require doing so.

For the life of Sopel 7.x, we still plan to maintain compatibility with Python
2.7 unless it becomes absolutely necessary to drop it. For example, if a severe
bug is found in one of Sopel's dependencies, and the fix is only released for
Python 3, we would consider dropping Python 2 support in the next minor version.

From Sopel 8 onward, it would be much easier to implement new features and
enhancements if we dropped support for very old Python releases. For example,
Sopel's support for reloading modules during runtime can be made much more
robust using features added to the language in Python 3.4.

The crux of the matter is this: Sopel's range of supported Python releases
remained stagnant for far too long. While the Sopel project was effectively
unmaintained between late 2016 and early 2018, Python 3.3 reached end-of-life
(September 29, 2017). During the lengthy development period of Sopel 7, Python
3.4 reached end-of-life (March 18, 2019). Sopel 7 is likely to be released very
close to the EOL of Python 2.7.

We can't keep testing support for these old versions forever. At some point,
Sopel's core developers will lose the ability to run them locally. (Python 3.3
is already difficult—though not impossible—to install on current popular Linux
systems like Ubuntu 18.04 LTS.) Travis CI, our continuous integration testing
provider for contributions from both maintainers and the community alike, won't
keep supporting the installation of EOL Python releases indefinitely. We can't
support what we can't test.

Keeping all this in mind, the current plan is as follows. Note that it is
subject to change, as Sopel's development pace remains quite leisurely relative
to the overall Python ecosystem.

  - Sopel 7 will try to maintain the same Python version compatibility range as
    Sopel 6
    - This may change as Sopel 7 gets closer to release, depending on how our
      testing infrastructure and dependencies look, but we're motivated to keep
      things as-is (one of Sopel's maintainers still runs a production instance
      on Python 2.7, and cannot upgrade that system to a compatible version of
      Python 3 without significant work)
  - Sopel 8 will drop support for Python releases that are EOL as of the start
    of its development cycle
    - This **definitely** means 2.7, 3.3, and 3.4 (already EOL)
    - Python 3.5 and 3.6 support **might** be dropped, depending on timing
      - Python 3.6 is [tentatively][PEP-494] EOL in December 2021, so presumably
        support for 3.5 will end before then, but we don't have enough concrete
        information from the Python project to _really_ plan this far in advance

[PEP-494]: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0494/


## Database support

Sopel 7 brings back support for databases other than SQLite—an often-requested
feature ever since Sopel went SQLite-only in version 5.

While we can't practically offer documentation on every possible setup, it
should be fairly easy to migrate an existing installation to any supported
database type with a bit of search-fu. Sopel's database support is built on
SQLAlchemy, which has [ample documentation][sqlalchemy-dialects] of its own
about getting up and running with various back-ends.

Please don't hesitate to offer feedback in [our IRC channel][sopel-freenode] or
[a GitHub issue][gh-new-issue]. This is a huge feature, and with a small team
it's simply not possible for us to test everything—especially the less common
database types (paid ones like Oracle, especially).

[gh-new-issue]: https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/issues/new
[sopel-freenode]: irc://chat.freenode.net/sopel
[sqlalchemy-dialects]: https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/13/dialects/index.html


## CLI restructuring

Version 7 deprecates most of the command-line arguments that Sopel has used for
most of its life, in favor of a much more extensible command structure.

Instead of having arguments like `--quit` or `--configure-modules`, Sopel's CLI
now works on a sub-command system (like Git and other popular tools). This will
allow adding more functions without having to share one global argument
namespace, and make the commands more "speakable".

The full new command structure will be documented in the [Command-line
arguments]({% link _usage/command-line-arguments.md %}) after release, but as a
general overview of the old structure vs. the new:

|             This            |           Becomes           |
| :-------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `sopel --quit`              | `sopel quit`                |
| `sopel --kill`              | `sopel quit --kill`         |
| `sopel --configure-all`     | `sopel configure`           |
| `sopel --configure-modules` | `sopel configure --modules` |

There's one argument deserving of special mention: `--migrate`/`-m`. It will
be removed in Sopel 7, because it has been a no-op since version 4.0.0.
Someone deleted the code to handle it without mentioning it anywhere, but
Sopel has continued to carry around this useless argument since 2014. No more!

New commands are not always going to be shorter than the old ones (see the
`--kill` example), but we're looking at the future picture. This is just the
start of Sopel's CLI evolution, and more features will come based on this new
command structure.

### Removal of old commands

For the life of Sopel 7, the existing ("legacy") arguments are still supported,
just with deprecation notices in the `--help` output.

In Sopel 8, the old arguments from Sopel 6 and lower will be removed.

Later releases of Sopel 7 may output warnings when deprecated arguments are
used, but you really should update your scripts immediately upon upgrading to
Sopel 7. Then you can't forget later!


## Sopel 7 API changes

### Managing URL callbacks

For quite a while, Sopel modules wishing to override the `url.py` module's
automatic title-fetching for certain URLs have customarily done something along
these lines:

```python
# in the module's setup() function:
    if not bot.memory['url_callbacks']:
        bot.memory['url_callbacks'] = tools.SopelMemory()
    bot.memory['url_callbacks'][compiled_regex] = methodname
```

Similar manual manipulation of the object in memory was needed to unregister
handlers at module unload:

```python
# in the module's shutdown() function:
    try:
        del bot.memory['url_callbacks'][compiled_regex]
    except KeyError:
        pass
```

Going forward, a new set of API methods should be used instead:

  - `bot.register_url_callback(pattern, methodname)`, to call `methodname` when
    a URL in a message matches the `pattern`
  - `bot.unregister_url_callback(pattern)`, to unregister the `pattern` and its
    associated callback(s)
  - `bot.search_url_callbacks(url)`, to find callbacks matching the given `url`

Manually accessing `bot.memory['url_callbacks']` as before will continue to work
for the life of Sopel 7.x, at a minimum. However, doing so is considered
deprecated, leaving future versions free to move the callback storage if needed.

### Adding multiple command examples

Decorating a module callable like this was a great way to add documentation to
that command through Sopel's `help` module:

```python
from sopel import module

@module.example('.foo barbaz')
def foo_cmd(bot, trigger):
    bot.action('foos %s' % trigger.group(3))
```

However, *only one example* could ever appear in the `help` output. This was
[confusing](https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/issues/1200) to module authors.

Furthermore, if more than one example was defined:

```python
from sopel import module

@module.example('.foo barbaz')
@module.example('.foo spam eggs sausage bacon')
def foo_cmd(bot, trigger):
    bot.action('foos %s' % ', '.join(trigger.group(2).split())
```

It was not necessarily intuitive which example would be displayed if a user
did `.help foo`. The code says it would use `example[0]`. That's the first one
in the list, which makes sense. But take a guess which of the two above would
be used—`.foo barbaz` or `.foo spam eggs sausage bacon`?

Ready to see if you were right?

Sopel would use `.foo spam eggs sausage bacon` as the example, because due to
how decorators work, it ends up first in the internal list despite appearing
last in the source code. Not very intuitive for beginning module writers…

So, in Sopel 7, there is a `user_help` argument to `@module.example`. If at
least one of a callable's examples has this attribute set to `True`, all such
examples will be used when outputting help for that command:

```python
from sopel import module

@module.example('.foo barbaz', 'foos barbaz', user_help=True)
@module.example('.foo', "I can't foo that!")
@module.example('.foo egg sausage bacon', 'foos egg, sausage, bacon', user_help=True)
def foo_cmd(bot, trigger):
    if not trigger.group(2):
        return bot.say("I can't foo that!")
    bot.action('foos %s' % ', '.join(trigger.group(2).split())
```

Here, Sopel's help output will show both `.foo barbaz` and `.foo egg sausage
bacon` as examples. Plain `.foo` does not have `user_help=True` (it's purely
there for testing), and so it will not be shown.

Of course, backwards compatibility is important! That's why we used this
approach. Callables without any `user_help=True` examples will behave just
like they would have in Sopel 6 and older: The "first" example (the one
closest to the function's `def` line, last in the source line order) will
appear in `help`'s output.

Making `user_help=True` the default would make *a ton* of sense, definitely!
But if we did that, many (many) existing Sopel (and Willie) modules would
potentially output "bad" help information—so we elected to keep the old
behavior by default in an effort to minimize any "breakage".


## Sopel 7 module changes

### Rewrite of `spellcheck`

As of February 2018, the Python bindings for `enchant` [became unmaintained][
pyenchant-unmaintained]. This made it increasingly difficult to install the
dependencies required for the `spellcheck` module work, and often [caused][
windows-enchant] [problems][linux-enchant] with new installations.

Because of this, the `spellcheck` module was rewritten to use `aspell` instead.
In the process, it also gained support for a custom word list, managed by a set
of new commands:

  - `.scadd` - stages a word for adding to the bot's word list
  - `.scpending` - lists words pending addition to the bot's custom list
  - `.scdel` - removes a word from the pending list
  - `.scsave` - commits pending words to the bot's word list
  - `.scclear` - clears the list of pending words without saving

Unfortunately, the `aspell` API only supports *adding* words to the custom
dictionary. To *remove* a custom word, a user must manually edit the dictionary
file, so we decided to go with a two-step process. Hopefully it will help Sopel
admins around the world avoid adding typos to their bots' custom dictionaries!

Depending on how much trouble the `aspell` dependencies cause, support for the
`spellcheck` module might become a setuptools extra. Feedback is welcome!

  [pyenchant-unmaintained]: https://github.com/rfk/pyenchant/commit/4df35b7
  [windows-enchant]: https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/issues/1142
  [linux-enchant]: https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/pull/1454


## Planned future API changes

This section is all about stuff that won't cause problems *now*, but *will*
break in a future release if not updated. Most of these are planned removals of,
or changes to, API features deprecated long ago.

We suggest reviewing these upcoming changes, and updating your own modules if
they still use anything listed here, as soon as possible. Updating modules
published to PyPI should take priority, especially modules written for Sopel 6
that are not future-proofed by capping Sopel's version in their requirements.

If you use third-party modules that have not been updated, we encourage you to
inform the author(s) politely that they need to update. Or better yet, submit a
pull request or patch yourself!

### Removal of `bot.privileges`

Sopel 7.x will be the last release series to support the `bot.privileges` data
structure (deprecated in [Sopel 6.2.0][v6.2.0], released January 16, 2016).

Beginning in Sopel 8, `bot.privileges` will be removed and modules trying to
access it will throw an exception. `bot.channels` will be the _only_ place to
get privilege data going forward.

### Removal of `bot.msg()`

[Back in 6.0][v6.0.0], Sopel's API standardized around a consistent argument
order for messaging functions: `message` first, then an optional `recipient` (or
`destination`, if you like). Part of the old API, `bot.msg()`, has stuck around
since then because it was, [quote][msg-hard-comment], "way too much of a pain to
remove". In fact, it turned out to be quite easy to remove.

None of Sopel's own code uses this old method any more, and we will remove it
entirely in 8.0. Uses of `bot.msg()` in 7.0 will emit a deprecation warning, so
any remaining third-party code that still uses it can be found and patched.

  [msg-hard-comment]: https://git.io/sopel-msg-pain

### Rename/cleanup of `sopel.web`

While the whole `sopel.web` module was marked as deprecated in [Sopel
6.2.0][v6.2.0], because it largely serves as a wrapper around the `requests`
library, parts of it seem to be useful enough that they should be kept around.

For Sopel 8, we intend to move `sopel.web` to `sopel.tools.web`. Ideally the new
location will be available in Sopel 7 to provide a transitional period. Similar
to how importing from both `willie` and `sopel` worked in the run-up to Sopel
6.0, it will be possible to do any of the following during Sopel 7's life cycle:

  - `import sopel.web`
  - `from sopel import web`
  - `import sopel.tools.web`
  - `from sopel.tools import web`

In Sopel 8, we will remove the pointers from `sopel.web` to the new location.
These explicitly deprecated functions will also be removed at the same time:

  - `sopel.web.get()` — use `requests.get()` directly instead
  - `sopel.web.head()` — use `requests.head()` directly instead
  - `sopel.web.post()` — use `requests.post()` directly instead
  - `sopel.web.get_urllib_object()` — seriously, just use [`requests`][requests]

We will also tweak the module constants:

  - `sopel.web.default_headers`: renamed to `sopel.tools.web.DEFAULT_HEADERS`
  - `sopel.web.ca_certs`: removed in `sopel.tools.web` — it no longer has any
    function (and was probably not useful for Sopel plugins to import, anyway)

New additions to Sopel's web tools (there may be a few) will be available only
in the new location (`sopel.tools.web`). Functions and constants that we plan to
remove (as listed above) will be available only from the old `sopel.web` module.

  [requests]: https://pypi.org/project/requests/
  [v6.0.0]: {% link _changelogs/6.0.0.md %}
  [v6.2.0]: {% link _changelogs/6.2.0.md %}
