willie_6.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Willie 6.0 Migration
---

# Willie 6.0 Migration

Writing Willie modules is cool. But what's cooler is *sharing* them. We want to
make that easier. With that in mind, we're preparing for Willie 6 to focus on
enabling that. It will include some new features to make it easier to share and
enjoy modules.

However, in order to facilitate these changes, we do have to make some breaking
changes. This page tells you what you need to do to account for them. It will
be updated with more information as development toward Willie 6 continues.
Don't worry; this will likely be the last release with breaking changes for a
while.

An early alpha version is available [here](https://github.com/embolalia/willie/releases/tag/6.0.0a0)

## Login configurations

This is the only user-facing breaking change we're planning. In 5.3.0, the
`auth_password`, `auth_user`, and `auth_method` settings in the config, were
added, and apply to all the different ways of authenticating that Willie
supports. They will replace the old settings (like `nickserv_password`) which
will be removed in 6.0.  If you configure with the wizard, you won't notice
this change; it only really concerns you if you're manually editing the config
file.

## Reorganization of `willie.tools`

A few things have been shifted around in `willie.tools` for 5.3.0, splitting
the module up into a few smaller, easier to maintain modules. While they're
still importable directly from `willie.tools` in 5.3.0, they'll only be
importable from their new locations in 6.0.

## Static configuration sections

The documentation for the core configuration settings has always been lacking,
so we've come up with a way to make it document itself the same way we document
the API. However, to force ourselves to document it, we'll be disabling the
magic that lets you grab arbitrary keys from the core config. You'll only be
able to use the pre-defined ones. The sections for your own modules will stay
the same as they are now, unless you want to use this new functionality for
them. Only `config.core`, and possibly the sections for some of the modules we
include by default, will change.

## Refactoring of module loading

A bunch of stuff is getting moved around and refactored so that we can load
modules from folders. Unless you're messing with the loading internals in your
modules, this won't break anything for you.

## Removing ancient rule formats

This really only affects you if you're porting a phenny or jenni module. Those
bots supported callables with a tuple in the rule attribute. Willie quietly
accepted this, when you set the attribute directly rather than with a
decorator, though it was considered deprecated from 3.1. It added confusing
code with no clear benefit, so we've removed it.

Commit message:

Add note about name change

willie_6.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Willie 6.0 Name Change and Migration
---

# Willie 6.0 Name Change and Migration

Writing Willie modules is cool. But what's cooler is *sharing* them. We want to
make that easier. With that in mind, we're preparing for Willie 6 to focus on
enabling that. It will include some new features to make it easier to share and
enjoy modules.

However, in order to facilitate these changes, we do have to make some breaking
changes. This page tells you what you need to do to account for them. It will
be updated with more information as development toward Willie 6 continues.
Don't worry; this will likely be the last release with breaking changes for a
while.

An early alpha version is available [here](https://github.com/embolalia/willie/releases/tag/6.0.0a1).

## Name change

For a number of reasons, we're changing Willie's name. The tentative new name
is Sopel; further suggestions can be given
[here](http://goo.gl/forms/f7AxcbOiTo). This will have a very big impact on
everyone. Users will need to install the bot using the new package name. Module
authors will need to import things from the new package name (that is,
replacing `import willie.module` and the like with `import newname.module`).

## Login configurations

This is the only user-facing breaking change we're planning. In 5.3.0, the
`auth_password`, `auth_user`, and `auth_method` settings in the config, were
added, and apply to all the different ways of authenticating that Willie
supports. They will replace the old settings (like `nickserv_password`) which
will be removed in 6.0.  If you configure with the wizard, you won't notice
this change; it only really concerns you if you're manually editing the config
file.

## Reorganization of `willie.tools`

A few things have been shifted around in `willie.tools` for 5.3.0, splitting
the module up into a few smaller, easier to maintain modules. While they're
still importable directly from `willie.tools` in 5.3.0, they'll only be
importable from their new locations in 6.0.

## Static configuration sections

The documentation for the core configuration settings has always been lacking,
so we've come up with a way to make it document itself the same way we document
the API. However, to force ourselves to document it, we'll be disabling the
magic that lets you grab arbitrary keys from the core config. You'll only be
able to use the pre-defined ones. The sections for your own modules will stay
the same as they are now, unless you want to use this new functionality for
them. Only `config.core`, and possibly the sections for some of the modules we
include by default, will change.

## Refactoring of module loading

A bunch of stuff is getting moved around and refactored so that we can load
modules from folders. Unless you're messing with the loading internals in your
modules, this won't break anything for you.

## Removing ancient rule formats

This really only affects you if you're porting a phenny or jenni module. Those
bots supported callables with a tuple in the rule attribute. Willie quietly
accepted this, when you set the attribute directly rather than with a
decorator, though it was considered deprecated from 3.1. It added confusing
code with no clear benefit, so we've removed it.
