_tutorials/part-3-memory-and-url-info-functions.md, before:

---
title: "Sopel tutorial, Part 3: Memory and URL info functions"
migrated: true
source: wiki
previously:
  - /tutorials/part-4-memory-and-url-info-functions/
---

**NOTE: This tutorial is being updated for 6.0. Most of it will work with 5.4.1
or above, but below 6.0 you may need to replace "sopel" with "willie" in some
places.**

Communicating safely between modules can be very useful. Sopel provides for
this with the Memory system. The intended use is for when you have volatile
information which needs to be quickly and safely accessed and updated while the
bot is running. In this part of the guide, we're going to cover how to use it.

## Memory basics

The bot object that gets passed to callables has the attribute `memory`. This
is basically a Python dict with some added thread safety. True to form, though,
you don't need to worry about how that works. The only difference is that, if
you want to be thread safe (and you do), you should use the `contains` function
rather than the `in` keyword when checking if memory contains a given key. So
very simply, to see if a key is in memory you can just do 
`bot.memory.contains(key)`. If you want to access that key, you just do
`bot.memory[key]`. Keys can be any of the same things they can be in regular
Python dicts - numbers, strings, tuples, etc. - but they're usually strings.

### Sample use: Keeping track of the last URL

One frequent use of memory is to keep track of the last URL that was seen in a
channel. The bot currently ships with a `.title` command , found in `url.py`,
which will give the title or other URL information on the last URL posted in
the channel. The `url.py` module knows how to keep track of urls that other
people say, but what about when Sopel itself says a URL, like as the result of
the `.duck` command in `search.py`, which gives the first link from a
DuckDuckGo search of a given query? The answer is to put that link into memory.

What different memory keys exist and are used for is entirely by convention;
the API spells out no special rules here. However, one of the ones used by the
modules the bot ships with is `last_seen_url` which, as you'd expect, contains
the last seen URL. The key itself is a Python dict of channel names to the
last URL seen in that channel. So when the `.duck` command wants to update it,
it uses code like this:

```py
    if 'last_seen_url' not in bot.memory:
        bot.memory['last_seen_url'] = SopelMemory()
    bot.memory['last_seen_url'][trigger.sender] = url
```

Where `trigger.sender`, as you'll recall, is the channel (or nick, if a PM)
the message came from, and `url` is the result from the search. To make the bot
memory thread-safe, we use `SopelMemory` objects instead of normal dicts.

## URL info functions

One of the things that the memory system enables is advanced URL information.
For example, Sopel will respond to a link to a YouTube video with not just
the title, but the uploader, the time it was uploaded, the duration, and more.
This part is simple enough. Where it gets interesting, though, is that Sopel
will also do this in response to a *shortened* link, or other redirect link, to
a YouTube video, and it even knows to do this when the last seen URL is from
YouTube and someone uses `.title`. Yet `youtube.py` (or whatever simmilar
module you want to write) doesn't have to handle shortened links or `.title`
itself. And thanks to memory, this magic is pretty simple to perform. We start
in `youtube.py`'s `setup` function:

```py
def setup(bot):
    regex = re.compile('(youtube.com/watch\S*v=|youtu.be/)([\w-]+)')
    if not bot.memory.contains('url_callbacks'):
        bot.memory['url_callbacks'] = {regex: ytinfo}
    else:
        exclude = bot.memory['url_callbacks']
        exclude[regex] = ytinfo
        bot.memory['url_callbacks'] = exclude
```

The first thing we do is compile a regular expression which matches YouTube
video links. The rest of the function is just making sure that a memory key
called `url_callbacks` exists in memory. It will be a Python dict, mapping the
compiled regular expression to the function to call when it matches (in this
case, `ytinfo` which is defined later in the file). `url.py` will use this to
determine whether there's extended information available for a URL. If there
is, it will shut up and let the other function handle it. If there isn't, but
the URL is a redirect to a link that *does* have extended information, it will
call the appropriate function and let it handle the URL.

Next, we need to see how the `ytinfo` function works. We only need to see four
lines of it to get the gist; the rest is just retrieving the information from
YouTube.

```py
@rule('.*(youtube.com/watch\S*v=|youtu.be/)([\w-]+).*')
def ytinfo(bot, trigger, found_match=None):
    match = found_match or trigger
    vid_id = match.group(2)
    #stuff
```
The first line defines a rule that this function will trigger on. Note how it's
the same as the one we associated with it in memory above. This way, this
function will handle it directly when it sees it in the channel, rather than
relying on `url.py` being there. (This design makes the system a bit more
modular.)

The second line will seem a bit unusual. We have a third, optional argument
here that you don't usually see in callables. When `url.py` is calling this
function, it will provide the regular expression match object in this third
argument. However, when the function is triggered directly, no argument will be
provided for it, so it will default to None.

There are a few different ways you can go about doing what this third line
does. Here, what we're doing is saying that the variable `match` will be the
`found_match` argument if it's given, but otherwise it will be the `trigger`
argument.

The fourth line takes advantage of Python's "duck typing". `trigger` is a
Sopel `Trigger` object, and `found_match` is a regular expression
`MatchObject`. However, both of them define their `group` function to mean the
same thing, so we can safely do `match.group(2)` and know that it's going to
give us the second group from the regular expression match that created it.
Since the regex we told `url.py` to match on, way up in the `setup` function,
and the regex we made trigger this function, are the same, the results of this
line will be the same regardless of how this function was called. So we can, in
just a few lines of code, get the video ID from the URL regardless of where
this function was called.

Want to learn about how to document (and test!) your module's commands?
[Continue to part 4!]({% link _tutorials/part-4-the-help-command.md %})

Commit message:

tutorials: Rewrite 6.0 "NOTE" headers to encourage upgrading

_tutorials/part-3-memory-and-url-info-functions.md, after:

---
title: "Sopel tutorial, Part 3: Memory and URL info functions"
migrated: true
source: wiki
previously:
  - /tutorials/part-4-memory-and-url-info-functions/
---

**NOTE: This guide is for Sopel 6.0+. If you are still using a version named
"Willie", we strongly encourage you to upgrade, as such old versions are no
longer supported.**

Communicating safely between modules can be very useful. Sopel provides for
this with the Memory system. The intended use is for when you have volatile
information which needs to be quickly and safely accessed and updated while the
bot is running. In this part of the guide, we're going to cover how to use it.

## Memory basics

The bot object that gets passed to callables has the attribute `memory`. This
is basically a Python dict with some added thread safety. True to form, though,
you don't need to worry about how that works. The only difference is that, if
you want to be thread safe (and you do), you should use the `contains` function
rather than the `in` keyword when checking if memory contains a given key. So
very simply, to see if a key is in memory you can just do 
`bot.memory.contains(key)`. If you want to access that key, you just do
`bot.memory[key]`. Keys can be any of the same things they can be in regular
Python dicts - numbers, strings, tuples, etc. - but they're usually strings.

### Sample use: Keeping track of the last URL

One frequent use of memory is to keep track of the last URL that was seen in a
channel. The bot currently ships with a `.title` command , found in `url.py`,
which will give the title or other URL information on the last URL posted in
the channel. The `url.py` module knows how to keep track of urls that other
people say, but what about when Sopel itself says a URL, like as the result of
the `.duck` command in `search.py`, which gives the first link from a
DuckDuckGo search of a given query? The answer is to put that link into memory.

What different memory keys exist and are used for is entirely by convention;
the API spells out no special rules here. However, one of the ones used by the
modules the bot ships with is `last_seen_url` which, as you'd expect, contains
the last seen URL. The key itself is a Python dict of channel names to the
last URL seen in that channel. So when the `.duck` command wants to update it,
it uses code like this:

```py
    if 'last_seen_url' not in bot.memory:
        bot.memory['last_seen_url'] = SopelMemory()
    bot.memory['last_seen_url'][trigger.sender] = url
```

Where `trigger.sender`, as you'll recall, is the channel (or nick, if a PM)
the message came from, and `url` is the result from the search. To make the bot
memory thread-safe, we use `SopelMemory` objects instead of normal dicts.

## URL info functions

One of the things that the memory system enables is advanced URL information.
For example, Sopel will respond to a link to a YouTube video with not just
the title, but the uploader, the time it was uploaded, the duration, and more.
This part is simple enough. Where it gets interesting, though, is that Sopel
will also do this in response to a *shortened* link, or other redirect link, to
a YouTube video, and it even knows to do this when the last seen URL is from
YouTube and someone uses `.title`. Yet `youtube.py` (or whatever simmilar
module you want to write) doesn't have to handle shortened links or `.title`
itself. And thanks to memory, this magic is pretty simple to perform. We start
in `youtube.py`'s `setup` function:

```py
def setup(bot):
    regex = re.compile('(youtube.com/watch\S*v=|youtu.be/)([\w-]+)')
    if not bot.memory.contains('url_callbacks'):
        bot.memory['url_callbacks'] = {regex: ytinfo}
    else:
        exclude = bot.memory['url_callbacks']
        exclude[regex] = ytinfo
        bot.memory['url_callbacks'] = exclude
```

The first thing we do is compile a regular expression which matches YouTube
video links. The rest of the function is just making sure that a memory key
called `url_callbacks` exists in memory. It will be a Python dict, mapping the
compiled regular expression to the function to call when it matches (in this
case, `ytinfo` which is defined later in the file). `url.py` will use this to
determine whether there's extended information available for a URL. If there
is, it will shut up and let the other function handle it. If there isn't, but
the URL is a redirect to a link that *does* have extended information, it will
call the appropriate function and let it handle the URL.

Next, we need to see how the `ytinfo` function works. We only need to see four
lines of it to get the gist; the rest is just retrieving the information from
YouTube.

```py
@rule('.*(youtube.com/watch\S*v=|youtu.be/)([\w-]+).*')
def ytinfo(bot, trigger, found_match=None):
    match = found_match or trigger
    vid_id = match.group(2)
    #stuff
```
The first line defines a rule that this function will trigger on. Note how it's
the same as the one we associated with it in memory above. This way, this
function will handle it directly when it sees it in the channel, rather than
relying on `url.py` being there. (This design makes the system a bit more
modular.)

The second line will seem a bit unusual. We have a third, optional argument
here that you don't usually see in callables. When `url.py` is calling this
function, it will provide the regular expression match object in this third
argument. However, when the function is triggered directly, no argument will be
provided for it, so it will default to None.

There are a few different ways you can go about doing what this third line
does. Here, what we're doing is saying that the variable `match` will be the
`found_match` argument if it's given, but otherwise it will be the `trigger`
argument.

The fourth line takes advantage of Python's "duck typing". `trigger` is a
Sopel `Trigger` object, and `found_match` is a regular expression
`MatchObject`. However, both of them define their `group` function to mean the
same thing, so we can safely do `match.group(2)` and know that it's going to
give us the second group from the regular expression match that created it.
Since the regex we told `url.py` to match on, way up in the `setup` function,
and the regex we made trigger this function, are the same, the results of this
line will be the same regardless of how this function was called. So we can, in
just a few lines of code, get the video ID from the URL regardless of where
this function was called.

Want to learn about how to document (and test!) your module's commands?
[Continue to part 4!]({% link _tutorials/part-4-the-help-command.md %})
