_appendices/ircv3.md, before:

---
title: IRCv3 compatibility
migrated: true
source: wiki
order: 2000
---

From version 4.1.0, Sopel supports [IRCv3](https://ircv3.net/). This page details how different pieces of the new standard are supported.

## IRCv3.1
### Mandatory components
#### Capability negotiation
Capabilities can be requested by a module in its `setup` procedure, using `bot.cap_req`. This function can also be used to require that a capability *not* be used, and will handle making sure that there is no conflict. If there is, an exception will be raised, and the module can decide whether to fail (and leave itself unloaded) or handle the problem gracefully.

#### `multi-prefix`
From version 4.1.0, Sopel supports bitwise channel permissions. `bot.privileges` contains the privileges for each user in each channel. The privilege is a bitwise integer, which can be compared to constants for each known type of privilege. For example, `bot.privileges['#YourPants']['Embolalia'] & sopel.module.OP` will return `True` if Embolalia is an op in #YourPants. Using an inequality operator (e.g. `>=`) is often more useful in practice, as the above would return `True` only if Embolalia is reported as an op, but not if that user is an owner, despite that being a higher level. With `multi-prefix` enabled, the above would be `True` if Embolalia is an op, even if that user is also an owner, as this capability makes it easy for Sopel to recognize when a user has multiple levels.

`multi-prefix` is enabled by default on any server which supports it.

#### SASL Authentication
If the server supports SASL authentication, and a `sasl_password` value is set in the `[core]` section of the config file, Sopel will attempt to authenticate with it. By default, the authentication mechanism given is `PLAIN`; this can be changed with the `sasl_mechanism` value in the `[core]` section of the config. No other mechanism has been tested. Regardless of the mechanism, the token sent will be a base-64 encoding of `'\0'.join((nick, nick, pass))`, where `nick` is the bot's nickname and `pass` the provided SASL password.

### Optional Extensions
#### `account-notify`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A module can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `away-notify`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A module can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `extended-join`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A module can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `tls`
**This is not currently supported.**

## IRCv3.2 (pending)
### Mandatory components
#### Message tags
`trigger.tags` will contain a map of tag names to their values. If no tags are sent, or the server does not support tags, this will be empty.

There is currently no direct way to send a message with tags, though it *may* be possible with `bot.write`.
#### Message intents
If a message has an intent, it can be accessed with `trigger.tags['intent']`. Currently, there is no effort made to ensure that a message with an `ACTION` tag behaves the same way as one sent as `\x01ACTION message\x01`, and as such **it is recommended that modules *not* request the `intents` capability**, as it may cause unexpected behavior in other modules. Remedies are being explored for this in future versions.

There is currently no direct way to send a message with intents, though it *may* be possible with `bot.write`.
#### Metadata
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A module can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `monitor`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A module can request this extension with no known problems.
### Optional extensions
#### `server-time`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A module can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `batch`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A module can request this extension with no known problems.

Commit message:

Plugins, plugins everywhere
Updated content of just about every page containing the string "module"
to use "plugin" instead when appropriate. We're all-in on this change of
terminology; even script filenames and variables are updated.

Tweaked the plugin-autodoc script to use Python 3, as well. It was not
working properly under py2 on my test system, and since Netlify's build
images all have py3 available it makes more sense to just use that than
spend time fixing the problem under 2.7 (which is EOL soon).

Now the whole Netlify build script calls python3/pip3 specifically.

Note: The plugin-autodoc script has a kludge to let upstream _sopel keep
its references to the '_usage/meetbot-module.md' page even though it's
been renamed to '_usage/meetbot-plugin.md'. At some point, that should
be removed. The script needs plenty of other cleanup, too, so…

_appendices/ircv3.md, after:

---
title: IRCv3 compatibility
migrated: true
source: wiki
order: 2000
---

From version 4.1.0, Sopel supports [IRCv3](https://ircv3.net/). This page details how different pieces of the new standard are supported.

## IRCv3.1
### Mandatory components
#### Capability negotiation
Capabilities can be requested by a plugin in its `setup` procedure, using `bot.cap_req`. This function can also be used to require that a capability *not* be used, and will handle making sure that there is no conflict. If there is, an exception will be raised, and the plugin can decide whether to fail (and leave itself unloaded) or handle the problem gracefully.

#### `multi-prefix`
From version 4.1.0, Sopel supports bitwise channel permissions. `bot.privileges` contains the privileges for each user in each channel. The privilege is a bitwise integer, which can be compared to constants for each known type of privilege. For example, `bot.privileges['#YourPants']['Embolalia'] & sopel.module.OP` will return `True` if Embolalia is an op in #YourPants. Using an inequality operator (e.g. `>=`) is often more useful in practice, as the above would return `True` only if Embolalia is reported as an op, but not if that user is an owner, despite that being a higher level. With `multi-prefix` enabled, the above would be `True` if Embolalia is an op, even if that user is also an owner, as this capability makes it easy for Sopel to recognize when a user has multiple levels.

`multi-prefix` is enabled by default on any server which supports it.

#### SASL Authentication
If the server supports SASL authentication, and a `sasl_password` value is set in the `[core]` section of the config file, Sopel will attempt to authenticate with it. By default, the authentication mechanism given is `PLAIN`; this can be changed with the `sasl_mechanism` value in the `[core]` section of the config. No other mechanism has been tested. Regardless of the mechanism, the token sent will be a base-64 encoding of `'\0'.join((nick, nick, pass))`, where `nick` is the bot's nickname and `pass` the provided SASL password.

### Optional Extensions
#### `account-notify`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A plugin can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `away-notify`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A plugin can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `extended-join`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A plugin can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `tls`
**This is not currently supported.**

## IRCv3.2 (pending)
### Mandatory components
#### Message tags
`trigger.tags` will contain a map of tag names to their values. If no tags are sent, or the server does not support tags, this will be empty.

There is currently no direct way to send a message with tags, though it *may* be possible with `bot.write`.
#### Message intents
If a message has an intent, it can be accessed with `trigger.tags['intent']`. Currently, there is no effort made to ensure that a message with an `ACTION` tag behaves the same way as one sent as `\x01ACTION message\x01`, and as such **it is recommended that plugins *not* request the `intents` capability**, as it may cause unexpected behavior in other plugins. Remedies are being explored for this in future versions.

There is currently no direct way to send a message with intents, though it *may* be possible with `bot.write`.
#### Metadata
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A plugin can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `monitor`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A plugin can request this extension with no known problems.
### Optional extensions
#### `server-time`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A plugin can request this extension with no known problems.
#### `batch`
There is nothing using or requesting this extension by default. A plugin can request this extension with no known problems.
